# Instant Articles, Accelerated Mobile Pages, Twitter Cards and Open Graph

By R. S. Doiel 2016-05-30

## The problem

The web has gotten slow. In 2016[1] the  average page weight is in multi-megabytes and the average number of network  requests needed to deliver the content is counted in  the hundreds. In the mix are saturated networks and a continued public  expectation of responsiveness (web wisdom suggests you have about 3 seconds  before people give up).  The odd thing is we've known how to build fast  websites for a decade[2] or so.
Collectively we don't build them fast[3].

=> http://httparchive.org/trends.php 1: http://httparchive.org/trends.php
=> https://www.stevesouders.com/ 2: https://www.stevesouders.com/
=> https://www.sitepoint.com/average-page-weight-increased-another-16-2015/ 3: https://www.sitepoint.com/average-page-weight-increased-another-16-2015/

## Meet the new abstractions

Corporations believe they have the answer and they are providing us  with another set of abstractions. In a few years maybe these will  get distilled down to a shared common view but in the mean time disc  costs remain reasonably priced and generating these new forms of  pages or feeds is a template or so away.

* Twitter Cards[4] and Open Graph[5] * Exposing your content via social media, search results or embedded in pages via an aside element
* Accelerated Mobile Pages[6] (also called AMP) * A simplification in content delivery to improve web reading experience * Its usefulness is it proscribes an approach to leverage what we have * AMP works well with Twitter Cards, Open Graph and can leverage Web Components
* Instant Articles[7] * a format play to feed the walled garden of Facebook for iOS and Android devices

=> https://dev.twitter.com/cards/overview 4: https://dev.twitter.com/cards/overview
=> http://ogp.me/ 5: http://ogp.me/
=> https://www.ampproject.org/ 6: https://www.ampproject.org/
=> https://instantarticles.fb.com/ 7: https://instantarticles.fb.com/

## The players

### Twitter Cards and Open Graph

Twitter's Titter Cards and Facebook's Open Graph offer approaches to  build off of our existing meta elements in an HTML page's document  head.  They are named space to avoid collisions but supporting both  will still result in some content duplication. The k-weight  difference in the resulting HTML pages isn't too bad.

Adopting either or both is a matter of adjusting how your render your  web page's head block.  It is easy enough to do manually but easier  still using some sort of template system that renders the appropriate  meta elements based on the content type and contents in the page  being rendered.

Google and other search engines can leverage this richer meta  data and integrate it into their results. Google's Now application can  render content cards based on either semantic. It also appears that  content cards are being leverage selectively for an aside and related  content on Google search results pages. You could even built this into  your own indexing process for use with the Solr or Elasticsearch.

Content Cards offer intriguing opportunity for web crawlers and search  engines.  This is particularly true when combined with mature feed  formats like RSS, OPML, Atom and the maturing efforts in the linked  data community around JSON-LD.

### AMP - Accelerated Mobile Pages

The backers of AMP (not to be confused with Apache+MySQL+PHP) are largely publishers including major news outlets and web media companies in the US and Europe. This is an abridged list from 2015--

* BBC
* Atlantic Media
* Vox Media
* Conde Nast
* New York Times
* Wall Street Journal
* The Daily Mail
* Huffington Post
* Gannet
* The Guardian
* The Economist
* The Financial Times

In additional to the publishers there is participation by tech companies such as Google, Pinterest, Twitter, LinkedIn and Wordpress.com.  Accelerated Mobile Pages offer benefits for web crawlers and search engines supporting surfacing content is clearly and enabling easier distinction from  advertisements.

### Instant Articles

In additional to Open Graph Facebook has put forward Instant Articles[8]. Like AMP it is targeting content delivery for mobile. Unlike AMP Instant Articles is an explicit binding into Facebook's walled garden only exposing the content on supported versions of iOS and Android. You don't see Instant Articles in your Facebook timeline or when
you browse from a desktop web browser.  Unlike the previous examples you actually need to sign up to participate in the Instant Article publishing process.  Sign up cost is having a Facebook account, being approved by Facebook and compliance with their terms of service. Facebook does provide some publishing tools, publishing controls as well as some analytics. They do allow 3rd party ads as well as encourage access to their advertising network.  Once approved the burden on your content manage process  appears manageable.

=> https://developers.facebook.com/docs/instant-articles 8: https://developers.facebook.com/docs/instant-articles

You can submit Instant Articles via a modified RSS feed or directly through their API.  In this sense the overhead is about the same as that for implementing support for Twitter Cards Open Graph, and AMP. Facebook does a good job of quickly propagating changes to your Instant Articles across their platform. That's nice.

Why go through the trouble? If you're a content producer and your audience lives on Facebook Facebook commands the attention of a lot of eye balls.  Instant Articles provides  another avenue to reach them.  For some Facebook effectively controls the public view of the  web much as America Online and Prodigy did decades ago. Dave Winer[9]  has written extensively on how he implemented Instant Article support along with  some very reasoned pros and cons for doing so. The landscape is evolving and  Dave's river of news[10] is worth following.

=> https://twitter.com/davewiner 9: https://twitter.com/davewiner
=> http://scripting.com 10: http://scripting.com

## Impact on building content

These approaches require changes in your production of your HTML and RSS sent to the browser. Twitter Cards and Open Graph change what you put in the HEAD element of the HTML pages.  AMP proscribes what you should put in the BODY element of the webpage. Instant Articles tweaks your RSS output.  Not surprisingly the major content management  systems Wordpress and Drupal have plugins for this.  All can be implemented via your template  system or page generation process.

## Whither adopt?

Because these approaches boil down to content assembly the adoption risk  is low.  If your audience views Twitter, Facebook or Google search results  then it is probably worth doing.  All allow you to continue to publish your  own content and own your URLs as opposed to being a tenant on one or another  platform. That benefits the open web.