# Getting things setup

By R. S. Doiel, 2022-10-09

I'm digging my gopherhole on sdf.org[1] as I wait for my validation to go through.  The plan is to migrate content from rsdoiel.github.io to here and host it in a Gopher context.  It's interesting learning my way around sdf.org. Reminds me of my student days when I first had access to a Unix system.  Each Unix has it own flavors and even for the same Unix type/version each system has it's own particular variation. Unix lends itself to customization and that why one system can "feel" or "look" different than the next.

I'm trying to remember how to use Pico (vi isn't available yet). Discovering how far "mkgopher" can go (very far it turns out).

I'm looking forward to validation so I can have access to Git and "move in" to this gopherspace in a more sustainable way.

## Things to read and do

* wait to be validated
* learn gitia[2] and setup up a mirror my personal projects and blog
* read up on gophernicus[3] (the gopher server used by sdf.org)
* twenex project[4], sounds interesting, I remember accessing a TOPS-20 system at Whitesands in New Mexico once upon a time.
* figure out to access comp.lang.oberon if it is available on sdf.org
* figure out, after validation, if I can compile OBNC for working on Artemis and Oberon-07 code projects

## Updates

7:30 - 7:30; Gopher; Setup; Account verified, Yippee!

=> gopher://sdf.org:70/0/users/rsdoiel 1: gopher://sdf.org:70/0/users/rsdoiel
=> https://git.sdf.org 2: https://git.sdf.org
=> https://www.gophernicus.org/ 3: https://www.gophernicus.org/
=> https://www.twenex.org/ 4: https://www.twenex.org/