# Welcome

> I am a human. I wrote music and prose. I write software.

### The small internet

* Robert's ball of yarn...[1] at twtxt.net[2]
* Robert's warren[3]
* Robert's bookwyrm[4]

=> twtxt.txt 1: twtxt.txt
=> https://twtxt.net/user/rsdoiel/ 2: https://twtxt.net/user/rsdoiel/
=> gopher://sdf.org:70/1/users/rsdoiel/ 3: gopher://sdf.org:70/1/users/rsdoiel/
=> https://bookwyrm.tilde.zone/user/rsdoiel 4: https://bookwyrm.tilde.zone/user/rsdoiel

## ... slightly larger Internet

Robert's current Pachyderm

```html
<!-- - [Robert's current pachyderm](https://tilde.zone/@rsdoiel "not quite small internet as pachyderms are large") -->
```

# ... the WEB

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## title: "Robert's ramblings"

### Recent Posts

## Series

Series start as blog posts but continue as collections that explore an idea, topic or theme.

* Mostly Oberon[5], Oberon-07 on POSIX systems
* Software Tools[6], Oberon-07 implementations of classic command line programs
* Pandoc Techniques[7], using Pandoc as your site generator
* Exploring FreeDOS[8], installation, exploration and development
* SQL reflections[9], notes regarding SQL in the context of MySQL 8, SQLite 3 and Postgres 14

=> gemini://sdf.org/rsdoiel/series/mostly-oberon.gmi 5: /series/mostly-oberon.gmi
=> gemini://sdf.org/rsdoiel/series/software-tools.gmi 6: /series/software-tools.gmi
=> gemini://sdf.org/rsdoiel/series/pandoc-techniques.gmi 7: /series/pandoc-techniques.gmi
=> gemini://sdf.org/rsdoiel/series/freedos.gmi 8: /series/freedos.gmi
=> gemini://sdf.org/rsdoiel/series/sql-reflections.gmi 9: /series/sql-reflections.gmi

## Projects

* Artemis[10] - Oberon-07 module collection for OBNC[11], Oxford[12] and Ofront+[13] compilers.
* pttk[14], a tool kit for Pandoc generated websites. It includes a proof-of-concept Pandoc Pre-processor called "prep". "prep" will take a JSON document, transform it into to YAML front matter suitable for processing with Pandoc. It also includes "blogit" a blog site generator and manager used to prepare this website's blog
* obc-3-libext[15] - exploring compatibility in Karl Landström's Extension Library modules with Mike Spivey's Oxford Oberon Compiler

=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/Artemis 10: https://rsdoiel.github.io/Artemis
=> https://miasap.se/obnc/ 11: https://miasap.se/obnc/
=> https://spivey.oriel.ox.ac.uk/corner/Oxford_Oberon-2_compiler 12: https://spivey.oriel.ox.ac.uk/corner/Oxford_Oberon-2_compiler
=> https://github.com/Oleg-N-Cher/OfrontPlus 13: https://github.com/Oleg-N-Cher/OfrontPlus
=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/pttk/ 14: https://rsdoiel.github.io/pttk/
=> https://github.com/rsdoiel/obc-3-libext 15: https://github.com/rsdoiel/obc-3-libext

## Command line tools

### Screen Play and writing tools

* scripttool[16] - a tool for working with screenplay formats such as Final Draft, FadeIn, Fountain and Open Screenplay Format (e.g. .fdx, .osf, .fadein and .fountain)
* fountain[17] - A Go package for working with Fountain markup. Includes three example programs fountainfmt which is a pretty printer for fountain documents, fountain2json which converts fountain files to JSON  and fountain2html an experimental HTML renderer for fountain documents
* fdx[18] - A Go package for working with Final Draft XML files (.fdx)
* osf[19] - A Go package for working with Open Screen Play formatted files

=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/scripttool/ 16: https://rsdoiel.github.io/scripttool/
=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/fountain/ 17: https://rsdoiel.github.io/fountain/
=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/fdx/ 18: https://rsdoiel.github.io/fdx/
=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/osf/ 19: https://rsdoiel.github.io/osf/

### Additional text rendering/formatting tools

* pttk[20] - a deconstructed content manage system for managing this site
* shorthand[21] - a text label expander with markdown support
* stngo[22] - Standard Timesheet Notation processor for my personal project time logs
* opml[23] - A minimal OPML package that features a OPML sort, cat and to json utility

=> https://rsdoiel.github.io/pttk/ 20: https://rsdoiel.github.io/pttk/
=> https://rsdoiel.github.com/shorthand/ 21: https://rsdoiel.github.com/shorthand/
=> https://rsdoiel.github.com/stngo/ 22: https://rsdoiel.github.com/stngo/
=> https://rsdoiel.github.com/opml/ 23: https://rsdoiel.github.com/opml/

## Appendix

=> project-index.gmi Experiments & Projects

## North L. A. County

* Public Safety Agencies List[24]
* LA County Emergency website[25]
* City of Santa Clarita Emergency website[26]

=> https://twitter.com/rsdoiel/lists/safety-agencies-nola-co 24: https://twitter.com/rsdoiel/lists/safety-agencies-nola-co
=> https://www.lacounty.gov/emergency/ 25: https://www.lacounty.gov/emergency/
=> https://santaclaritaemergency.com/ 26: https://santaclaritaemergency.com/